[THEME MUSIC]
>>GEORGE NOORY: Welcome
to "Beyond Belief".
A scholar of Hebrew language
and literature and the history
of the Jewish people,
from ancient times
to the Holocaust and
beyond, Dr. Ken Hanson, PhD,
is the coordinator
of the Judaic Studies
at the University of
Central Florida in Orlando.
Ken discusses the true story
of the Wailing Wall, Rabbi
emeritus Yehudah Getz,
who in 1982, dug deep
through a long sealed tunnel
underneath Jerusalem's
fabled Dome of
the Rock, claiming
to have encountered the long
lost Ark of the Covenant.
Ken, welcome back
to "Beyond Belief".
>>KEN HANSON: Good to be
back with you, George.
>>GEORGE: How are your
hunts and your mysteries?
They seem to be abound.
>>HANSON: They are
abounding indeed.
I've written a whole new
book, in fact, about some
of these stories,
which are just amazing.
It's history and
archaeology combined
with some incredible
human interest stories.
"Whose Holy Land?"
archaeology meets geopolitics
in today's Middle East
the only place on
Earth where archaeology
is involved with political
dispute and often
even violence.
>>GEORGE: If we could only
get things resolved out there,
what an area it would
be, wouldn't it?
>>HANSON: Wouldn't it be nice
if we could all just get along.
Having lived in Israel myself
and in Jerusalem for over three
years, what an incredible place.
There's an area, in
fact, of the Old City,
it's about one square mile
called the Holy Basin.
It's an appropriate
name, because you've
got the three great religions
of the Western world,
Judaism, Christianity,
and Islam,
with their holy sites exactly
in this one square mile basin.
And what a treasure
trove for scholars,
for theologians, anyone who
just has an inquisitive mind.
You can walk the trails.
If you want to walk
where Jesus walked,
I'll show you
where Jesus walked.
>>GEORGE: Oh my god.
Can you feel the energy
when you're out there?
I mean, if you actually walk
on land that Jesus walked on,
can you feel that?
>>HANSON: If you're open
to the energy, oh my.
You can feel it.
I remember very clearly as
a young student of history
coming to Jerusalem
for the first time
and laying eyes on the
Temple Mount, which is now
occupied by the great
Muslim shrine called
the Dome of the Rock.
Golden shrine.
>>GEORGE: Right.
>>HANSON: And just to look
at that, to behold it.
>>GEORGE: It's
enormous, isn't it?
>>HANSON: It's an enormous
shrine, but the beauty of it
as well.
And it sits, I'm convinced,
exactly in the spot
where the ancient
temple of Solomon
and later the Temple of
King Herod once stood.
>>GEORGE: Wow.
>>HANSON: In fact--
>>GEORGE: There's a lot
of gold there somewhere.
>>HANSON: --there
was an archaeologist
in the 1970s, Leen Ritmeyer,
who was able to place cameras
high up inside the golden
dome and photograph
the floor of that Muslim shrine.
>>GEORGE: From above down?
>>HANSON: Above
and looking down.
>>GEORGE: All right.
>>HANSON: Now, the floor right
in the center of it is bedrock.
It's been open from the time
that the shrine was built back
in the 600s of the Common Era.
And I remember the very
first time with goose bumps
walking into that Muslim shrine,
and looking at that floor,
and noticing there
are all manner
of different indentations
and grooves in that bedrock
that the dome is over.
And Leen Ritmeyer was able
to do precise measurements
of the indentations,
the grooves, as it were,
in the bedrock.
And he discovered that those
measurements are exactly
the measurements of the
Ark of the Covenant.
>>GEORGE: Whoa.
That are described in the Bible.
>>HANSON: Described
in the Bible.
>>GEORGE: And tell us, Ken,
about the Ark of the Covenant.
What is its purpose?
Why does it seem to be
such a great mystery to try
to discover it and look for it.
>>HANSON: Everybody
wants to know
about the Ark of the Covenant,
ever since "Raiders of the Lost
Ark", of course.
>>GEORGE: Yeah.
>>HANSON: And there's a
lot to get excited about.
I brought, in fact, a
little representation of--
people say, is this the
Ark of the Covenant?
And I tell them, actually, no.
>>GEORGE: It looks like a
little version of it, though.
>>HANSON: Doesn't it, though?
This is a replica of an
ancient Egyptian chest
of the kind that would have
been found, for example, in King
Tut's tomb.
We have a little
Egyptian amulet, in fact,
in Tut's tomb, that
depicts a chest just
like this, with statues
of the winged Isis,
touching their wings
above the chest.
Now, I'm a scholar,
and scholars like
to question everything and
even dismiss whatever they can.
"Ah, the Ark of the
Covenant is just a fable."
Well, if it was
just a fable made up
centuries later by Israelites
living in another land,
why would they fashion
their Ark of the Covenant
to look almost
identical to furniture
found in King Tut's tomb?
How would they even know
what that looked like?
>>GEORGE: Exactly, exactly.
>>HANSON: It's remarkable.
Golden covered-- and
of course you're not
supposed to open the
Ark of the Covenant,
but in there would have been
the two tablets of the Ten
Commandments given by Moses.
People think--
>>GEORGE: God to Moses.
>>HANSON: God to Moses.
People think, well,
the Ten Commandments,
must've been five written on one
tablet and five on the other.
Actually, not likely.
It's likely that all 10
were written on each tablet.
>>GEORGE: On each tablet.
>>HANSON: Because
this was a covenant,
and a covenant is
a legal agreement.
It's a contract.
This was a contract between
God and the people of Israel,
and you have to have two copies,
just like in a modern contract.
>>GEORGE: What is it--
>>HANSON: God's copy,
the people's copy.
>>GEORGE: What is
it about the Ark,
Kenny, where they say
that if you do open it,
you could be killed,
like some burst
of some energy or something.
What is that all about?
>>HANSON: Well, the Ark was
said to have brought victory
in battle to the Israelites.
And indeed the Ark
accompanied the Israelites
across the Sinai, and
into the Promised Land,
during the conquest of
the land under Joshua.
Ultimately, it was
captured by the Philistines
in one of the
subsequent battles.
And the Philistines discovered
that the Ark brought
upon them horrible plagues.
So much so that they said,
we can't handle this anymore.
We're sending it back to you.
So there was some kind
of awesome power--
>>GEORGE: A power
source of something.
>>HANSON: --that accompanied
the Ark, according
to the Bible at least.
They sent it back
to the Israelites,
to a place called
Kiryat Ye'arim, where
it stayed for a very
long time, apparently,
after the Philistines
sent it back.
Well, archaeologists
have actually
been digging in Kiryat Ye'arim,
looking for any traces of it.
Nothing.
>>GEORGE: No.
>>HANSON: But they did find
an ancient shrine there,
like an ancient temple, where
such a thing might in fact have
been held until such time as
it was brought up to the Temple
in Jerusalem.
First, it was brought
up by King David
to Jerusalem, then Solomon,
the great King Solomon
built a temple where
the Ark was housed.
And then mysteriously it
disappears from the narrative.
Here is a little representation
of the Temple of Jerusalem.
>>GEORGE: It's gorgeous.
>>HANSON: Solomon built
one, and then King
Herod the Great built an even
grander version of the temple.
This is King herod's temple.
The rear part of the
temple, the aft part,
was a special chamber called
the Kodesh Hakodashim, the Holy
of Holies, separated
by a curtain
from the rest of the structure.
>>GEORGE: How many
people could go in there?
>>HANSON: Only Israelite
priests were allowed to enter.
The people themselves stayed
in the courtyards outside.
Only the Israelite priests
and only the high priest
went into the Holy
of Holies one time
a year on Yom Kippur,
the Day of Atonement.
That's where the Ark was held.
>>GEORGE: How long do you think
it took to construct that?
That's a gorgeous facility.
>>HANSON: It took decades alone
under King Herod the Great
to construct this.
He built it on an enormous
limestone platform
that he also had constructed
of enormous limestone ashlars.
The platform is
still there today,
even though the
temple was completely
destroyed by the Romans
and the Dome of the Rock
now sits in its place.
That platform took
a natural hill
and turned it into a huge
plateau of an area of some 24
football fields.
Can you imagine?
That's the size
of this platform,
that still adorns the center
of Jerusalem to this day.
>>GEORGE: That's
gotta be inspiring.
Now we've got a
program on Gaia called
"Secret Life of Symbols".
Scholar Jordan Maxwell
talks a little bit
about the Ark of the Covenant
tied into the Egyptians.
>>JORDAN MAXWELL: To
emphasize that there
were a lot of secrets
and mysteries in relation
to the Ark that maybe people
still don't know today.
So the most important secret
of all concerning the Lost
Ark of the Hebrews
is that was not
Hebrew at all to start with.
There was no Hebrew
Ark in history.
The whole idea of an Ark
of the Covenant, covenant
simply means contract.
And so the whole idea of the Ark
of the contract, or covenant,
was not Hebrew at all.
It was Egyptian.
And so let me show you
what I'm talking about.
If you go to Bible dictionaries
and look up the word "ark",
you will see that even the
Bible dictionaries tell you
that the very word ark
comes from the Egyptian,
and then it shows you
a typical Egyptian ark.
And then if you go to
another Bible dictionary,
it talks about the Egyptian
ark, or the sacred chest.
And so now you
begin to see, when
you start doing the research on
the Lost Ark of the Covenant,
you begin to see that
a lot of pictures
have come out of
the ancient world,
showing you that the Egyptians
had an ark, not the Hebrews.
And here is an Egyptian
ark, and an Egyptian priest,
in an Egyptian museum.
So my point in showing
you this is the fact
that the Lost Ark of the
Covenant was borrowed.
The idea was borrowed
from the Egyptians.
>>GEORGE: What do you
think of that, Kenny?
>>HANSON: It's exactly what
I've been talking about.
>>GEORGE: Yeah.
>>HANSON: But it actually helps
to establish the historicity
of this account.
We have a whole
group of scholars,
being a scholar,
known as minimalists.
I respect them.
They try to suggest that most
of these biblical stories
were just fabricated,
just basically made up.
>>GEORGE: Just great stories.
>>HANSON: Great stories written
many centuries after the fact,
and we should not
take them literally.
OK, I get it.
I understand that.
>>GEORGE: Possible.
>>HANSON: Possible, but
when we find uncanny details
in the biblical
text that would not,
could not have been
known centuries later?
If I were writing a story
about, I don't know,
China 1,000 years ago, would I
know exactly the kind of dress
that was worn?
Would I know the
kind of furnishings?
>>GEORGE: You'd make it.
>>HANSON: Yeah, I'd make it up.
And yet to come up with
an Ark of the Covenant
that looks
authentically Egyptian,
as if Israelites
really were living
at some time in ancient Egypt
and came out in a great exodus,
it's controversial even to
say that in academic circles,
because so many deny that the
Israelites ever were in Egypt
or there ever was an exodus.
But the Ark is actually one of
the best proofs that we have.
>>GEORGE: Now,
Rabbi Yehudah Getz,
we talked about him at the
beginning of the program.
Who is he?
>>HANSON: Rabbi
Yehudah Getz was known
as the Rabbi Emeritus
of the Western Wall,
also called the Wailing Wall.
He was a die hard
zealot modern Israeli,
who had a passion to uncover the
whereabouts of the sacred Ark.
Now, bear in mind that with the
creation of the state of Israel
in 1948, the Eastern
half of ancient Jerusalem
fell to the Palestinian Arabs.
>>GEORGE: Sure.
>>HANSON: It was actually
annexed by the Hashemite
Kingdom of Jordan from 1948,
Israel's war of independence,
until 1967, the Six Day
War, when Israel reconquered
all of this territory.
That's what is so
controversial today.
>>GEORGE: To this day.
>>HANSON: But all of Jerusalem
suddenly fell to the Israelis.
The Israelis.
That means the Old
City, the ancient sites,
which were off
limits to Israelis,
to Jews, frankly,
from 1948 to 1967,
if you're Jewish,
if you're an Israeli
and you want to visit
the Western Wall
and just pray
there, well, there's
a no man's land
you have to cross.
You can't get into this area.
This was a war zone.
>>GEORGE: Yeah.
>>HANSON: The
Israelis retook it.
Rabbi Yehudah Getz was there,
and he said, "I am living here.
I'm living right
in the Old City."
>>GEORGE: Is he dead now?
>>HANSON: Yes.
Yes, he is.
But he had a passion
to actually start
digging underneath the rubble
of centuries along the Western
Wall.
>>GEORGE: What made him
think the Ark was there?
>>HANSON: Because if we
consider where the Temple stood
in antiquity, on this
enormous limestone platform,
all of this area had been
covered in centuries of rubble,
but Yehudah Getz wanted to dig
along underneath the rubble,
and he did so.
>>GEORGE: And they gave
him permission to dig.
>>HANSON: Yes, the Ministry
of Religious Affairs
gave him permission to do this.
And he started
tunneling, and he came
upon a gate discovered by
a British archaeologist
back in the 1800s,
Charles Warren.
They called him The Mole,
because he was always
digging underground.
The Mole, I love this guy.
And Getz came upon
Warren's Gate,
and he said, if I dig through,
if I open a hole essentially
in Warren's Gate, I can actually
follow the ancient tunnels
to the area right underneath
where the ancient temple stood.
And if the Ark of the
Covenant is anywhere,
I bet it's down there.
>>GEORGE: Wow.
That's fascinating.
Fascinating.
You know, there have
been rumors that the Ark
is in a church in Ethiopia.
Now, if that's the case, why
can't we just go to that church
and find out?
What's going on there?
>>HANSON: There is a story that
in the days of King Solomon,
of course, the
Queen of Sheba came,
and that perhaps when she
went back to her kingdom
in the south,
Ethiopia, presumably,
she may have brought
the Ark with her.
And the story is that it
remains in a church in Ethiopia,
a place called Axum to this
day, also in tightest secrecy.
I have a little bit of
a problem with that.
Because frankly, I don't
think that the Queen of Sheba
came from Ethiopia.
If you look at the way maps
were set out in ancient times,
the point up was not North.
It was East.
They looked at a map
with East looking up.
And South would have been
to the right of the map.
Well, the word "right"
in Hebrew is "yamin".
And there is an ancient
kingdom called Yemen.
"Yemen", "yamin".
>>GEORGE: Ah-hah.
There you go.
>>HANSON: And all we
know from the Bible
is that the Queen
of Sheba was queen
of the south, which
would have been right,
yamin, on the ancient maps.
I think she was from Yemen,
not from Ethiopia at all.
>>GEORGE: Now, the digging
for this tunnel, of course,
is it mysterious to this day?
Or have people gone down there?
>>HANSON: Well,
Rabbi Getz actually
entered through the tunnel,
through Warren's Gate,
and he said he was
overwhelmed with emotion.
He wrote in his journal, "I
sat there for a long time,
sprawled helplessly with warm
tears streaming down my face."
>>GEORGE: Really?
>>HANSON: That's what
he wrote in his journal.
Well, up above, on the
Temple Mount platform,
sounds of digging were heard.
And they were
immediately suspicious
that someone was down underneath
the Dome of the Rock, perhaps
trying to sabotage it,
or undermine it, or even
blow it up.
>>GEORGE: Oh my gosh.
>>HANSON: That's where the
geopolitics comes into play.
>>GEORGE: Yeah, how disgusting.
>>HANSON: And there have indeed
been plots by certain radical
Israelis--
I'm serious-- to blow
up the Dome of the Rock.
Can you imagine?
Why?
Because if this is
where the Temple stood,
we want a new temple
to be built there,
and that will usher
in the messianic age.
>>GEORGE: And this
is the way to do it.
Wow.
>>HANSON: When
they heard digging
underneath, they sent down
Arabs, obviously, workers,
workmen with trawls
to defend the place.
And they came upon Rabbi Getz
underneath in those tunnels
down there.
>>GEORGE: Already there.
>>HANSON: Already there.
And of course a
scuffle broke out.
There was fighting,
basically rioting.
And rioting did, in fact,
erupt all over Jerusalem.
Rabbi Getz had to leave.
>>GEORGE: How big
was this tunnel, Ken?
I mean, how many
people did it support?
>>HANSON: It was quite an
enormous tunnel, because again,
this platform, 24
football fields in area
and it was supported by
massive limestone arches
in order to flatten what had
originally been a natural hill.
>>GEORGE: And it was
about 40 feet underground?
>>HANSON: That's where the
tunnel that Rabbi Getz was,
in fact, yes.
And he came into
this new tunnel,
because he charged
through Warren's Gate.
And nobody had been
in this tunnel before.
This is directly underneath
the Dome of the Rock,
or leading to that area.
>>GEORGE: Did he claim
the Ark is still there,
buried somewhere?
>>HANSON: Well,
there was discussion
that he told his friends that
he actually saw it down there.
>>GEORGE: He saw the Ark?
>>HANSON: That's what
he told his friends.
Now, this may be apocryphal.
All we know is what he
wrote in his journal.
>>GEORGE: Would he make it up?
>>HANSON: But had to--
yeah, that's the question.
He had to leave quickly,
and the Israeli government
said seal that gate.
Do not go in there anymore.
Seal it with concrete.
Well, it is still possible to
travel that tunnel to this day.
I've walked through many times.
>>GEORGE: Is it still sealed?
>>HANSON: Yes.
We go along the tunnel that
Getz had originally dug,
which was perpendicular to
the Western Wall itself.
We get to Warren's Gate,
and there is the concrete.
You cannot go through.
>>GEORGE: Kenny tell us
about the Western Wall,
and then I want
to look at a clip
to give us that illustration.
What is the Western Wall?
>>HANSON: The
Western Wall, again,
a part of this enormous
artificial platform
that King Herod the Great
built to support his temple.
Now, the rear part of the
temple was the Holy of Holies.
That's where the
Ark originally sat.
>>GEORGE: Mm-hmm.
>>HANSON: But now you have
an artificial platform
with a retaining wall
all the way around.
Well, the Western side
of this retaining wall
is the closest area you can
get to where the Temple would
have stood and where the Holy
of Holies would have been.
>>GEORGE: And that's
the Western Wall.
>>HANSON: So that's
They sometimes call
it the Wailing Wall.
It actually sticks out further
to the south in this direction.
>>GEORGE: All right,
well, let's look
at an illustration about this.
>> The entire length of the
Western Wall is 1,500 feet,
almost a third of a mile.
Today, we only see approximately
180 feet, the Western Wall
plaza that we all know today.
Where is the rest?
Where did it disappear?
Today, most of the
Western wall is
covered by the houses
of the Muslim Quarter.
In just a moment, we're gonna
enter the Western Wall tunnels
and uncover the rest
of the Western Wall.
A pilgrim ascending
to the Temple Mount
needs to purify
himself beforehand.
And so anyone
coming to Jerusalem
has to bathe in a ritual bath.
In Hebrew a mikveh.
Maybe Jesus himself bathed
in one of these mikvehs.
After walking a few
seconds in the tunnels,
we've reached the Western Wall.
I'm standing near
the largest stone
found in the Western Wall.
Its length is over 40 feet long.
That is longer than a bus.
Its height, almost 12 feet high,
and its depth inside, 14 feet.
How much does it weigh?
Almost 600 tons.
That is equivalent to 200
elephants, or to 10 tanks,
or even to two 747 jumbo jets
with the people and the luggage
after shopping in Israel.
This large stone was carved at
a quarry in the northern parts
of the Temple
Mount, brought down,
lifted up three stories
high, placed symmetrically.
And the big question is, how?
We don't know.
>>GEORGE: That's what I
was gonna ask you, Ken.
How?
How did they do this?
>>HANSON: Amazing.
I've seen that stone many times.
It's one of the largest
items, objects ever lifted
before mechanized machinery.
>>GEORGE: How did they do it?
>>HANSON: 570 tons.
You could try to roll
it on wooden logs.
It'd crush the wooden logs.
Wouldn't it?
Well, I think I know.
>>GEORGE: Tell us.
>>HANSON: Because
there are limestone
quarries right in the
vicinity of the Temple Mount.
You can see them even today.
Solomon's Stables, for example,
so-called Solomon's Stables,
we have quarry marks
all in that area.
It's underground today.
Probably this stone was cut
round, like a huge column,
and then rolled literally on
an earthen ramp up into place.
And then when it was in
place, it was squared off.
>>GEORGE: How many people
would it take to push this?
>>HANSON: Thousands
and thousands.
And King Herod was a
literal slave-driver.
>>GEORGE: It's bigger
than the pyramid.
>>HANSON: Now, the
Romans destroyed
everything that was free
standing on the Temple Mount.
the Temple itself, all of
the walls that stood above,
but they could not
destroy the Temple Mount.
Those stones still remain.
And what I would like
to know is, why can't we
all just get along?
Why can't Jews get
along with Muslims,
Muslims get along Jews?
>>GEORGE: That's the
$64,000 question.
>>HANSON: And what a tragedy
that there actually were plots
to destroy, to blow up
the Dome of the Rock
launched by radical Israelis.
Now the rest of the
Israeli population
condemns these people.
They should be condemned.
>>GEORGE: Of course.
>>HANSON: But it only takes
one or two bad apples.
One of them, around the same
time that Getz was digging,
had actually purloined some
600 pounds of high explosive
from the Israeli army, that
he was planning to use to--
>>GEORGE: To blow it up.
>>HANSON: --blow up
the Dome of the Rock.
>>GEORGE: Just to--
>>HANSON: Well, so that we
can build a new temple there.
>>GEORGE: Now, what is the Rock?
>>HANSON: Now, the
Israelis foiled the plot.
>>GEORGE: When they
talk about the Rock?
>>HANSON: The rock
is that bedrock
that I talked about,
with those grooves in it,
that you can see to this day.
When I first saw those
grooves, I had no idea.
I thought, that's curious,
those grooves are in there.
Only later did Leen
Ritmeyer discover
those match the size of
the Ark of the Covenant
and the Holy of Holies itself.
And with 24 football
fields up there,
there is room to build another
temple up on top of the Temple
Mount without damaging, without
hurting the Dome of the Rock.
There is another Israeli rabbi--
actually, he's
originally American,
but he became a member of
the Israeli Knesset, which
is their parliament.
>>GEORGE: Sure.
>>HANSON: His name
is Yehudah Glick.
And for many years,
he has had a vision
of bringing Jews, Israelis, up
to the top of the Temple Mount
just to walk around
there, to pray.
This is not to do anything, not
to harm the Dome of the Rock
but just to pray.
>>GEORGE: Right, right.
>>HANSON: And the
Israeli authorities,
the police have said, no.
>>GEORGE: They don't
want them there.
>>HANSON: Because
it's too incendiary.
Finally, they let him walk up
around the top of the Temple
Mount, but they said,
but you can't pray.
You can walk, but
you can't pray.
No praying.
If we catch you praying--
>>GEORGE: No praying.
>>HANSON: I mean, unbelievable.
In 2014, he was
actually accosted
by an unknown motorcyclist
right after he gave a speech,
and the motorcyclist
pulled up to him
as he was getting into
his car and shot him
in the chest four times.
>>GEORGE: Did he kill him?
>>HANSON: No, miraculously--
miraculously, he survived.
And he has retained his
passion to open the Temple
Mount to people of all faiths.
>>GEORGE: He's still alive.
>>HANSON: He's still alive.
He's still up there, in fact.
In 2018, he actually
brought two lambs up
to the top of the Temple Mount
and sacrificed them up there.
This is Jewish ritual--
>>GEORGE: I'll bet that
they didn't like that.
>>HANSON: No, they
didn't, and rioting
has broken out in
the Islamic part
of the city over such things.
And the Israeli police
have tried to stop him.
Earlier this year, in fact,
2020, he was up there again.
He brought a group of
visitors, of tourists,
up to the top of
the Temple Mount,
where you're not supposed--
Well, you can go
there as long as you
stay within your boundaries.
You cannot deviate from the
path, and you cannot pray.
And the police
found him up there,
claiming that he was
deviating from the path.
And they accosted
him immediately,
and he sat down in protest.
And I saw this on
Israeli television.
In fact, I saw the event happen.
And they dragged him away, and
took him off, and arrested him.
Went to the police
station, because they
said he was veering off
of the prescribed path.
>>GEORGE: Well, let's look at
this controversy of the Dome,
Ken.
>> The Dome of the Rock is one
of the most iconic buildings
in the world, showing up in
travel posters everywhere
as an integral part of
the Jerusalem skyline.
It's one of the
most sacred sites
in the world for Muslims today.
Believed to be the site of
the Prophet Mohammed's night
journey and ascension, a story
briefly told in the Quran
and expanded in later
literature, in which Mohammed
miraculously travels from
Mecca to Jerusalem overnight
before ascending into heaven
to meet the prophets and God.
The building is also a
source of controversy,
as it stands on the same
spot as the First and Second
Jewish Temples, the
holiest site for Jews
and a site of vital importance
to their religious history.
Control of the
Temple Mount itself
or as it's called by
Muslims the Haram al-Sharif,
the noble sanctuary, remains in
a delicate political balance.
The Israeli government
controls access,
but the Jerusalem Waqf, an
Islamic administrative body
largely funded by the
Jordanian government,
manages all of the affairs
in the sanctuary itself.
For a building that
looms so large in history
and modern politics, what
even is the Dome of the Rock?
What was it used for, and
what's its status today?
First of all, it's
important to realize
that the Dome of the
Rock is not a mosque,
but better described
as a shrine.
However, we're not exactly
sure about its original meaning
and intended ritual function.
>>GEORGE: That's a gorgeous
facility, isn't it?
>>HANSON: It's one of the most
beautiful buildings I have ever
laid eyes on.
Now, when I first
lived in Jerusalem,
it was much easier to walk
around up on the Temple Mount.
I've been inside the Dome
of the Rock many times.
I've also been in
the Al-Aqsa Mosque.
There is a mosque.
>>GEORGE: Why have
things changed?
>>HANSON: Because of the
peace process, to be honest.
Because now Israel has
allowed the creation
of a Palestinian Authority.
>>GEORGE: Sure.
>>HANSON: In preparation
for a Palestinian state.
And the walk which was
mentioned in the video
here controls this area on
top of the Temple Mount.
The Israelis gave them
control under the Palestinian
Authority, and they've
made it much more difficult
for non-Muslims to
go up to these areas.
>>GEORGE: Ah-huh.
>>HANSON: Which I think is
a shame, as long as people
respect the religions.
Again, it's the bad apples
that ruin everything.
Way back in 1967, there was
another great Israeli rabbi,
Rabbi Shlomo Goren, who also
had designs on destroying
the Dome of the Rock.
>>GEORGE: Sheesh.
>>HANSON: And he
even mentioned this
to one of Israel's great
war heroes, Uzi Narkiss, who
helped to liberate the
Jewish Quarter of the city
during the Great War.
And he said to
Uzi, "Look, we need
to blow up the Dome of
the Rock, so that we
can build a new temple."
But Uzi--
>>GEORGE: That's terrorism.
>>HANSON: Yeah, it is.
And Uzi Narkiss, who represents
the great majority of Israelis,
he said, "Rabbi, I respect you.
But you say one more
word about that,
and I will personally take you
away and have you arrested."
>>GEORGE: Good.
>>HANSON: Good for him.
But tunneling continues
in the whole Holy Basin,
as we call it.
And I am actually in favor
of the tunneling, as long
as we can get to
good archaeology
and that it doesn't
disturb anybody,
that it doesn't disturb
either Muslim holy sites
or Muslim neighborhoods.
>>GEORGE: Right.
>>HANSON: In fact, a new tunnel
was just opened a year ago,
amidst a lot of continuing
controversy, a brand
new tunnel.
>>GEORGE: Seeking for
the Ark of the Covenant?
>>HANSON: This was different.
It all started back in 2004,
when to the south of the Temple
Mount a sewer pipe had
burst, and the Israelis
sent their engineers
to fix the pipes.
But again, this is sensitive
archaeological area,
and the rule is,
you have to have
competent archaeologists
who accompany
any such civic endeavor.
And as the pipe
was being repaired,
the archaeologists heard
some sounds underneath,
sounded like metal was
striking stone underground
as they were fixing this pipe.
And they said, stop
it, hold everything.
And they began to
clear away the area,
and they discovered a
series of ancient steps.
>>GEORGE: Steps going down?
>>HANSON: Steps.
Steps that were identical to
the steps leading right up
to the south end of the
Temple Mount in antiquity.
>>GEORGE: What's
the significance?
>>HANSON: These are the
only types of steps--
>>GEORGE: What's
the significance?
>>HANSON: They looked identical.
The only types of steps like
this known anywhere in Israel.
And they said, there
must be more here.
And they began to
dig underground
to uncover an entire
road of steps leading
from the ancient pool of Siloam
right up to the south end
of the Temple Mount.
The Pool of Siloam was
uncovered in all of this.
What's that?
Well, there is a story
in the New Testament
that Jesus of Nazareth
healed a man blind from birth
at the Pool of Siloam.
>>GEORGE: Right there.
>>HANSON: Do you want
to know where Jesus was?
We've got it.
We've got an exact location
where he would have been,
where he would have stood.
And this enormous road
of steps underground,
the whole thing underground
with rows of ancient shops
along the side, they call
it the Pilgrim's Road,
because thousands of
ancient Israelites
would have climbed those steps,
including Jesus of Nazareth,
in the days of
the ancient temple
to enter into the
sacred precincts.
>>GEORGE: That's fascinating.
>>HANSON: All of
this was underground,
but it had to be done
literally underneath
modern Arab villages,
the village of Silwan.
>>GEORGE: Back in 1996, there
were three days of riots.
>> Sometimes "Banned
from Television"
likes to expose our viewers
to video that is so bizarre,
it begs to be seen
in its unedited form.
The West Bank in Israel.
Rioters throw Molotov cocktails.
>>GEORGE: What was
that all about?
>>HANSON: 1996, the same
tunnel that Rabbi Getz had
been working on,
along the same line
the Western Wall, perpendicular
to that retaining wall,
led all the way to the northern
precinct of the Temple Mount
in antiquity.
And over the years, finally
in 1996, they completed it.
And the Israelis were able to
open an exit from that tunnel
right onto the Via Dolorosa.
>>GEORGE: Now, who was rioting?
The Palestinians?
>>HANSON: When the tunnel was
opened, it immediately set off
riots among the
Palestinian Arabs,
because they were,
afraid, again that this
was part of an Israeli plot
to open up that tunnel,
go underneath, and blow
up the Dome of the Rock.
Or, also, this
tunnel literally was
right underneath the Muslim
Quarter of the Old City.
You have Muslim
residents up above.
>>GEORGE: Are they
justified in being upset?
>>HANSON: Actually, no.
I mean, one can understand,
it's a very incendiary topic
and a very tense
area to live in.
But really, there was no
danger to any of these areas.
The Israelis were so careful.
The last thing they
wanted was a cave-in.
But they did want
for tourists to be
able to walk along that
tunnel and to witness
that enormous 570 ton stone
ashlar along that tunnel
and then to exit on the Via
Dolorosa, the traditional path
where Jesus walked, which
actually is not the path.
I'll show you the real one.
>>GEORGE: Right.
>>HANSON: But they
did make the exit.
And immediately it set off
massive, massive rioting.
Within a couple of days, there
were 68 Arabs who were dead.
>>GEORGE: What quelled it?
>>HANSON: Benjamin Netanyahu,
who was prime minister back
then as well, had to call in
tanks and helicopter gunships
just to quell the rioting.
And of course there
were casualties.
There were Israelis
who died as well.
Sadly, the majority
were Palestinians.
>>GEORGE: Sad.
>>HANSON: And that's how
archaeology meets geopolitics,
sadly, in the
moderate Middle East.
>>GEORGE: Yeah,
it's too bad they
can't all just get together.
>>HANSON: Absolutely.
But that is the
vision of Judaism
as well, that someday
a messianic king
will come, and will
establish peace on earth.
Can you believe it?
Judaism focuses not so
much on the hereafter,
but on the here and
now, on the present.
And there really
is a firm belief
that when the
Messiah comes, there
will be peace on this earth,
and all peoples will come up
in peace to study the holy
texts, the holy books,
and to live in peace
and tranquility.
>>GEORGE: Ken, if we find
the Ark of the Covenant,
and inside are the
Ten Commandments, what
does this do to Christianity,
to Judaism, to Islam?
The fact that it's discovered,
the Commandments are there,
the stories from the
Bible are obviously true,
what does that do?
>>HANSON: Well,
actually, the great Rabbi
of the Chabad-Lubavitch
ultra-orthodox movement, it's
called Chabad today,
and it's all over
the United States, the
late Rabbi Menachem Mendel
Schneerson, spoke
personally to Rabbi Getz
when he was about to
dig through the tunnel,
and look for the Ark,
and perhaps find it.
And Rabbi Schneerson
said to Rabbi Getz, look,
I wouldn't do this.
Because you might be
placing your life in danger
if you go ahead.
But then he followed, and
he said, but if you do,
and if you find the
Ark of the Covenant,
that is one step closer
to the final redemption.
And that is a belief
across Judaism.
That also propels some of the
modern folk, who are even today
searching for the Ark.
I have a friend who is
searching for the Ark in a cave
out in the middle of
the Judean Desert.
He thinks it's out there.
>>GEORGE: Where do
they get these leads?
>>HANSON: Well, there
is another text,
an apocryphal book
called The Book
of Maccabees, which
tells us that the Prophet
Jeremiah, before the Babylonian
conquest of the city in 586 BC,
actually rescued the
Ark and brought it out
into the middle of the
desert, into the middle
of the wilderness, and
hid it there in a cave,
and sealed it until
the end of days.
That's in the Book
of Second Maccabees.
Well, it's not in the Bible.
It's an apocryphal book.
>>GEORGE: What do you believe?
What do you believe?
>>HANSON: I don't put
a lot of stock in it,
but there have been people,
like my friend, my buddy who's
out there near the Dead Sea.
He thinks the Dead
Sea Scrolls point
to the exact location of
the cave where it's hidden.
Who knows?
I think-- I kind of doubt
it, but I think, look,
if you have the
wherewithal to dig, dig.
>>GEORGE: Dig.
>>HANSON: Dig.
>>GEORGE: As long as
you're not destroying.
>>HANSON: As long as
And he has all
kinds of problems,
because the Israelis
don't want to give him
permission to go out
there and dig in the cave,
where he thinks it's located.
>>GEORGE: Are they afraid
we're gonna find it?
>>HANSON: He thinks
that they are.
He thinks that they are.
I think probably they just don't
want more unauthorized digging,
because he's not a certified
archaeologist and so on.
But who knows?
He has friends in the
Israeli government,
who would like to see him
go ahead and open this.
I'd like to see us go back
through the tunnel of Rabbi
Getz and literally
go down there,
and open up that
tunnel again and see.
But it would of course
cause more rioting.
>>GEORGE: Who do you think
had the best lead, Ken?
Getz?
>>HANSON: I like Rabbi
Getz, personally.
Of course as a scholar--
>>GEORGE: You bet on him.
>>HANSON: Scholars are trained
to be skeptical of everything,
and the chances that
the Ark would actually
have survived all this time,
from a scholarly standpoint,
are minuscule.
But again, Rabbi Getz
said he saw something.
I don't know what
he saw, but I'd sure
like to find out what he saw.
>>GEORGE: See, I've
got this vision
that some billionaire
on this planet
already has the Ark in
his little home museum
or something.
>>HANSON: Stranger things have
happened, including the Dead
Sea Scrolls, which were
bargained off, and sold off,
and we still have stories of
people owning certain fragments
of Dead Sea Scroll material
that they got themselves and are
holding onto, and now want to
sell for millions of dollars,
and so on and so forth.
>>GEORGE: What keeps
driving you, Ken?
What keeps pushing you?
>>HANSON: Curiosity.
It's the same thing that
drove me to the land of Israel
to begin with as a
young history student.
I wasn't a theologian, per se.
I wanted to dig into
history and to archaeology,
and I'd never been out
of the United States
before in my life.
I just got on a plane
and headed to Jerusalem.
>>GEORGE: I mean, I've
never interviewed someone
with as much passion as you.
You really have it.
>>HANSON: It's easy
to get passionate.
And if you're not
passionate, then why do it?
Why do it?
Why?
Why not get excited
about what you live for?
And that's what keeps me going.
It keeps me as a professor,
as a writer, as an author.
That's why I wrote my new book.
I didn't even plan
to write this book.
It just came to me.
You know, this is a topic
that nobody has really
dealt with before.
And I sat down, and
I pounded it out.
>>GEORGE: Do you want
the Ark to be discovered?
>>HANSON: No one would
be more happy in the--
I would stand up and
dance right here and now,
if we had a good lead on
the Ark of the Covenant.
Again, the scholar in me is
doubtful, but questions linger.
The Prophet Jeremiah did detail
the various furniture items
of the ancient temple
that was carted away
into Babylonia at the time
of the ancient conquest.
The menorah, and
the table of the,
showbread and so
on and so forth.
He doesn't mention the
Ark of the Covenant.
Why not?
>>GEORGE: He would have.
>>HANSON: He would
have mentioned it.
So maybe it had already
been hidden away.
Why has it not appeared in
any other ancient document
or record of any
kind whatsoever?
These are the kind of
questions that linger.
The scholar is
doubtful, but hey,
who would have believed that a
set of 2000-year-old parchments
called the Dead
Sea Scrolls would
have survived all of this time?
>>GEORGE: Ken, thanks for
being on "Beyond Belief".
>>HANSON: Always a
pleasure, George.
>>GEORGE: What a
fascinating discussion.
Seeking the Ark of the Covenant.
Ark, a covenant, where
the Ten Commandments
given from God to Moses may
very well still be there.
Fascinating if we ever find it.
I'm George Noory.
Thanks for watching
"Beyond Belief".